README.md, before:

# Sequential

A macOS app for viewing a collection of images.

## Rationale

The Preview app built-in to macOS is probably one of the operating system's most useful features. Its capability of opening documents in a compact form with many options allows users to largely not require third-party applications, as well as not care about Preview itself. For most Mac users, Preview is simply one useful tool that rests in the background.

While Preview is great, it is not absolute. As Preview is an app that supports both reading and basic editing, it adopts a large scope and has to constrain itself on the features it supports to avoid overload. As an example, when viewing PDFs, Live Text works seamlessly; but when viewing images, Preview has to consider whether the user meant to select an area of the image or text within a region. For another example, when viewing PDFs, pages derive their size from their internal representation (e.g. the width and height of an image). While this may seem desirable, it requires the user to implicitly track the next page's size to maintain focus, making it not ideal for casual browsing where you don't want content to be cropped. These two behaviors may be preferred when using Preview, since the app's primary focus is general-purpose documents (e.g. a PDF you have to read and sign); but in more focused scopes (e.g. an image collection viewer), Preview starts to show its limitations.

When it comes to PDFs, Preview's feature set is rich; for images, however, not so much. The app expects you to view a single image at a time and cuts support for features like bookmarking, despite a collection of images progressing with each scroll being relatively simple to conceptualize. <!-- From here on out, figure out how best to cut out this entire section and replace it with just the chunks that matter. --> From my experience prior to developing Sequential, I had been using [a shortcut I wrote to convert a set of images into a single PDF with their sizes scaled to fit horizontally][shortcut]. It worked half the time and produced many issues:
- **Conversion had to take place before opening.** Similar to the built-in "Create PDF" shortcut, the conversion had to finish before the PDF would be created. For small sizes, this isn't much of an issue; but for larger ones (e.g. 250 MB+), the time in reading, scaling, and creating produces a long, dreaded delay.
- **Pages were often incorrectly scaled.** While the image width and height did match, the page size often did not.
- **Converting required significant CPU and memory usage.** It was common to see "BackgroundShortcutRunner" using 600% CPU in Activity Monitor, and because Shortcuts creates the PDF in-memory, a large-enough input could result in crippling memory consumption.
- **Scaling, in general, was often poor.** There were a number of times where I took a produced PDF and sent it to my phone, only to notice white lines that appeared on the border that would fade as I zoomed in.
- **The file size was much larger.** Since many images had to be artificially upsized, the resulting PDF often had a significantly larger file size compared to the input. For example, I have a local copy of the manga [Children of the Whales][children-of-the-whales], weighting in at ~300 MB. With this shortcut, however, the newly created PDF has a size of ~1 GB.

Sequential was created to provide an experience as simple as (or even simpler than) Preview, while also solving many of the outlined issues above. At the same time, however, it is not Sequential's goal to replace Preview (e.g. by replicating its basic editing capabilities) as Sequential's domain is scoped to image viewing.

## Features

- Simple interface: a main canvas for viewing images, and a sidebar for managing them
- Configurable margins: allow images to cover their whole frame, or make some room for yourself
- Continuous scrolling
- Support for Live Text
- Bookmarks
- Fast:
  - Only loads what is required up front, reducing initialization dramatically[^1]
  - Performs downsampling on images to match the size on-screen, improving CPU and memory usage while not compromising image quality.[^2] You can drop hundreds of 4K+ images and Sequential won't complain

## Screenshot

<details>
  <summary>An example using the 1st volume of the manga "The Ancient Magus' Bride"</summary>

  <img src="Documentation/Screenshot.png" alt="The app showcasing the main canvas with one image, and a sidebar with three images. The toolbar contains a toggle for the Live Text icon and the sidebar a tab for only listing bookmarked images.">
</details>

[^1]: A local copy of the 1st volume of the manga [The Ancient Magus' Bride][the-ancient-magus-bride] (~350 MB) loads in 1 second on my 2019 MacBook Pro. To compare, Preview loads the same set of images in 7 seconds, and continues to heavily utilize the CPU in the background for much longer.
[^2]: Downsampling involves processing an image to create a representation at a lower resolution. For Sequential, it's important to support displaying many images at many different sizes without sacrificing image quality or memory consumption. Before an image appears on-screen, it is downsampled at the size of the frame it's given with respect to how many pixels can fit in the frame. The result is that, at smaller frame sizes (e.g. in the sidebar), images appear roughly how they would at larger frame sizes (e.g. in the main canvas) while not introducing side effects like high pixelation.

[shortcut]: https://kyleerhabor.com/convert-images-to-same-width-pdf.shortcut
[children-of-the-whales]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Children_of_the_Whales
[the-ancient-magus-bride]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ancient_Magus%27_Bride

Commit message:

Refactor security scope handling
Previously, we made assumptions about what URLs from the system were security scoped. This was cubersome to handle and did not yield much benefit, since a URL that wasn't security scoped in one version of macOS could be later on (looking at you, drag & drop). This reimplementation just tries to access the scope and, if it's not available, log a warning while continuing.

As for new user-facing features:
- Windowless mode allows users to see just the image (and not the window's other components, like the toolbar). This was a feature at the start of the development of the app that I removed since I found it difficult to implement with List.

README.md, after:

# Sequential

A macOS app for viewing a collection of images.

## Rationale

The Preview app built-in to macOS is probably one of the operating system's most useful features. Its capability of opening documents in a compact form with many options allows users to largely not require third-party applications, as well as not care about Preview itself. For most Mac users, Preview is simply one useful tool that rests in the background.

While Preview is great, it is not absolute. As Preview is an app that supports both reading and basic editing, it adopts a large scope and has to constrain itself on the features it supports to avoid overload. As an example, when viewing PDFs, Live Text works seamlessly; but when viewing images, Preview has to consider whether the user meant to select an area of the image or text within a region. For another example, when viewing PDFs, pages derive their size from their internal representation (e.g. the width and height of an image). While this may seem desirable, it requires the user to implicitly track the next page's size, making it not ideal for casual browsing where users don't want content to be cropped. These two behaviors may be preferred when using Preview, since the app's primary focus is general-purpose documents (e.g. a PDF you have to read and sign); but for more focused scopes (e.g. a collection of images you want to read progressively), Preview starts to show its limitations.

When it comes to PDFs, Preview's feature set is rich; for images, however, not so much. The app expects you to view a single image at a time and cuts support for features like bookmarking, despite a collection of images progressing with each scroll being relatively simple to conceptualize. <!-- From here on out, figure out how best to cut out this entire section and replace it with just the chunks that matter. --> From my experience prior to developing Sequential, I had been using [a shortcut I wrote to convert a set of images into a single PDF with their sizes scaled to fit horizontally][shortcut]. It worked half the time and produced many issues:
- **Conversion had to take place before opening.** Similar to the built-in "Create PDF" shortcut, the conversion had to finish before the PDF would be created. For small sizes, this isn't much of an issue; but for larger ones (e.g. 250 MB+), the time in reading, scaling, and creating produces a long, dreaded delay.
- **Pages were often incorrectly scaled.** While the image width and height did match, the page size often did not.
- **Converting required significant CPU and memory usage.** It was common to see "BackgroundShortcutRunner" using 600% CPU in Activity Monitor, and because Shortcuts creates the PDF in-memory, a large-enough input could result in crippling memory consumption.
- **Scaling, in general, was often poor.** There were a number of times where I took a produced PDF and sent it to my phone, only to notice white lines that appeared on the border that would fade as I zoomed in.
- **The file size was much larger.** Since many images had to be artificially upsized, the resulting PDF often had a significantly larger file size compared to the input. For example, I have a local copy of the manga [Children of the Whales][children-of-the-whales], weighting in at ~300 MB. With this shortcut, however, the newly created PDF has a size of ~1 GB.

Sequential was created to provide an experience as simple as (or even simpler than) Preview, while also solving many of the outlined issues above. At the same time, however, it is not Sequential's goal to replace Preview (e.g. by replicating its basic editing capabilities) as Sequential's domain is scoped to image viewing.

## Features

- Simple interface: a main canvas for viewing images, and a sidebar for managing them
- Configurable margins: allow images to cover their whole frame, or make some room for yourself
- Continuous scrolling
- Support for Live Text
- Bookmarks
- Windowless mode: hides the title bar while you scroll, allowing images to cover the full window (`Settings... > Enable windowless mode`)
- Fast:
  - Only loads what is required up front, reducing initialization dramatically[^1]
  - Performs downsampling on images to match the size on-screen, improving CPU and memory usage while not compromising image quality.[^2] You can drop hundreds of 4K+ images and Sequential won't complain

## Screenshot

<details>
  <summary>An example using the 1st volume of the manga "The Ancient Magus' Bride"</summary>

  <img src="Documentation/Screenshot.png" alt="The app showcasing the main canvas with one image, and a sidebar with three images. The toolbar contains a toggle for the Live Text icon and the sidebar a tab for only listing bookmarked images.">
</details>

[^1]: A local copy of the 1st volume of the manga [The Ancient Magus' Bride][the-ancient-magus-bride] (~350 MB) loads in 1 second on my 2019 MacBook Pro. To compare, Preview loads the same set of images in 7 seconds, and continues to heavily utilize the CPU in the background for much longer.
[^2]: Downsampling involves processing an image to create a representation at a lower resolution. For Sequential, it's important to support displaying many images at many different sizes without sacrificing image quality or memory consumption. Before an image appears on-screen, it is downsampled at the size of the frame it's given with respect to how many pixels can fit in the frame. The result is that, at smaller frame sizes (e.g. in the sidebar), images appear roughly how they would at larger frame sizes (e.g. in the main canvas) while not introducing side effects like high pixelation.

[shortcut]: https://kyleerhabor.com/convert-images-to-same-width-pdf.shortcut
[children-of-the-whales]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Children_of_the_Whales
[the-ancient-magus-bride]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ancient_Magus%27_Bride
